---
title: Dungeons and Dragons
event_date: 2020-05-23
start: 15:00
end: 17:30
timezone: "America/Vancouver"
location: "#game-room"
freq: weekly
draft: false
---

Each of you is leaving Earth for Alpha Centari aboard the passenger transport ‘Leviathan’. While Earth and the solar system have certainly seen better days, and the Alpha Centari system is rich with prospects and diverse trade from hundreds of worlds and peoples -  each of you holds your own secret truth for why you specifically chose this moment in time to reallocate. Perhaps you’re looking for contracts of a INTERVAL=1;kind not legally obtainable in the confines of Sol’s bureaucracy. Perhaps you seek escape from a life you’d rather forget. Perhaps the riches of intergalactic adventure call your name. Whatever your reason is, you’re heading at light speed for your new future along with several thousand others who saw fit to purchase a ticket. Keep your wits about you and your blaster handy, it’s a dangerous galaxy out there.

All official content is ok for character creation. If someone wants to use a homebrew race or class I’d like to take a peek at it before we roll with it so I can make sure it’s not crazy overpowered or anything. Because we’re playing this sci-fi style, consider all those pieces of equipment normally termed “Crossbow” “sword” “plate-mail” and the like to be “Blaster” “lazer-sword” and “Carbon-plate” for example. Magic co-exists with technology in this futuristic setting and Elves, Dwarves, and Orcs are some of the extraterrestrial life that’s part of the intergalactic community.
