---
title: Bulding Solidarity with Niki Ashton and Jeremy Corbyn
date: 2021-03-31T17:43:26.845Z
---
Progressive International is an international coalition looking to unite people through worker solidarity, with a focus on peace, human rights, and an eco-friendly shift from status quo politics. 

There was a lot of negative tension building up to a Progressive International event on Saturday, March 20th, with discussions led by New Democrat MP Canadian Nikki Ashton and Labour MP Jeremy Corbyn. Despite the overall positivity and excitement for the chat between two progressive politicians, particularly in Canada, the event faced criticism in Canadian mainstream media, and even from the NDP itself. “Jagmeet Singh and New Democrats are committed to fighting anti-Semitism and will continue to push the Liberals to take more concrete actions, like tackling online hate, to combat it,” said NDP spokesperson Nina Amrov in a statement. 

The chat between Ashton and Corbyn was condemned [despite support for Ashton joining Progressive International in 2018](https://www.ndp.ca/news/mp-niki-ashton-joins-call-progressive-international) and current NDP [leader Jagmeet Singh’s past support of Corbyn.](https://twitter.com/theJagmeetSingh/status/1141047726014193665)  A long-time advocate for peace and justice, Corbyn, has been on the wrong end of a smear campaign regarding anti-Semitism. Among the many groups and individuals voicing their support, [IJV](https://www.ijvcanada.org/ijv-denounces-smears-against-ndp-mp-niki-ashton-and-former-uk-labour-party-leader-jeremy-corbyn/?fbclid=IwAR3Ikvp7lNf0Ya8sHskXIgmPck3ZDkrkxanIri7f_C_3mCbyYcX2fX-uHfk) (Independent Jewish Voices) shared their response to the backlash to the upcoming conversation which would entail discussions on inequality, imperialism, racism, climate justice and the effects that COVID-19 has had to expose the many failed systems of government.

When March 20th came around, the conversation with Progressive International was a success. With fielded questions screened beforehand from audience members, important topics were covered in the two-hour conversation. 

With a poster of Corbyn’s Peace and Justice Project as his backdrop, he emphasized the importance of the Black Lives Matter movement, and how it had a tremendous reach globally in the summer of 2020. The BLM movement is a great example of international solidarity. The movement reached people in a new light after the brutal death of George Floyd at the hands of law enforcement, showing people across the world from Argentina, to New Zealand that there is still severe inequality in the 21st century.

In addition to the importance of grassroots movements that have a global reach such as BLM, Ashton and Corbyn continued to emphasize the importance of international class and worker solidarity in an increasingly neoliberal government framework. As the global pandemic continues to wreak havoc, wealth disparities between the ultra-rich and the working class [continue to grow at an alarming rate](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2020/oct/07/covid-19-crisis-boosts-the-fortunes-of-worlds-billionaires). These disparities show how the extreme wealth transfer has harmed far too many people around the globe while enriching very few.

One of the loudest voices for a Canadian Green New Deal, Ashton, described how the oil and gas industry has had extreme consequences for vulnerable communities, particularly indigenous ones, in both the short and long term. Although advocating for proper responses from their respective governments, Ashton and Corbyn continue to push for an international overhaul and restructuring to add green infrastructure, while simultaneously not leaving workers behind. 

When asked about the ongoing atrocities in Yemen, and arms sales to Saudi Arabia, Corbyn stood his ground as he did in the early 2000’s condemning the Iraq War, urging pro-peace policy and diplomacy instead of war “There has to be a comprehensive approach to a peace policy for the whole region. That means not encouraging war between Iran and Saudi Arabia, I've got human rights questions for every government in that region, every single one of them. And I would ask those questions and demand those questions, but none of them, those human rights abuses are going to be dealt with by encouraging a war,” said Corbyn.

As the event wrapped up, in solidarity, figures such as Yanis Varoufakis, Cheri DiNovo, Dimitri Lascaris, Chris Ramsaroop, Naomi Klein, shared a pre-recorded message endorsing the conversation, as well as encouraging this extremely important international movement as we continue to navigate, and improve quality of life for a post-COVID-19 world.

<!--EndFragment-->