---
title: Wetlands, MZOs, and Corruption in Ontario
date: 2021-03-24T23:28:58.626Z
---
While Ontario government has shown itself to be be completely ineffectual serving the interest of the public handling the pandemic, it has been actively serving interests of wealthy elites. Just recently, Ford government [used a Ministerial Zoning Orders to push through six development deals](https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/ford-mzos-toronto-development-1.5942671) in Markham, Caledon, Vaughan, Clarington and New Tecumseth. These developments will result in destruction of local wetlands that serve as nesting grounds for migratory birds.

These MZOs were signed in secret without any public input, and [three of six of the MZOs benefit a single company called Flato, owned by a Doug Ford PC donor and insider](https://twitter.com/EmmaMci/status/1369424233613393927). Another major benefactor of this deal is Cortel Group owned by [Mario Cortellucci](https://twitter.com/RahRahRaina/status/1352258104818339841) who is an influential far right figure and also happens to be a major Ford donor. Amazon was another player in this deal planning to build a warehouse on wetland in Pickering, however the company eventually chose to [pull out](https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/amazon-warehouse-duffins-creek-wetland-pickering-1.5947252).

MZO fiasco is not an isolated incident. Earlier this year, Ford government initiated an effort to build highway 413 that would result in destruction of large parts of our Green Belt. This effort is now [formally opposed](https://www.cp24.com/news/mississauga-council-formally-opposes-hwy-413-as-crombie-warns-of-disastrous-impact-on-environment-1.5323956?cache=ofieaywbljoc%3Fot%3DAjaxLayout) by Mississauga council due to its disastrous impact on our environment.

Provincial government made a major decision to bulldoze a natural habitat without consulting the public or even consulting local government. Mayor of Aurora made [this](https://twitter.com/TMrakas/status/1374459816173707270) statement regarding the development. Ford government's attack on the environment led to [mass resignations](https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2020/12/07/doug-ford-government-defends-conservation-authority-changes-in-wake-of-mass-greenbelt-council-resignations.html) from the government-appointed Greenbelt advisory body.

While Ford government's abuses are egregious, it is important to note that previous Liberal government had its own share of scandals that ultimately led to its downfall. No matter what party is in power, we see the same pattern of the government putting interests of a wealthy minority over those of the working majority. 

Our system of governance is said to be democratic. Yet, our governments do not appear to represent the interests of the people. Instead, our system appears to function as a kleptocracy in practice. Ford government is aggressively destroying our environment despite public outcry is just one example in a long pattern of abuse of power vested in our officials.

Our first past the post system is directly at odds with democracy because it discriminates against third parties.First past the post elections artificially inflate representation of large parties while weakening smaller ones. Since the dominant party will win sole representation it may not even seem worth the effort to vote. A party that wins the largest number of votes, even less than a majority, wins 100% representation. Meanwhile, other parties receive 0% representation regardless of their actual support. This participation in the political process is discouraged.

On the other hand, if we had proportional representation, then every vote would count. The process provides each party with a number of seats that corresponds to the percentage of votes it receives. Every party provides a ranked list of candidates, voters vote for the party of their choice, and each party is awarded their proportional number of seats.

This is a straight forward process that allows citizens to vote for parties that most closely reflect their interests. Proportional voting also happens to be the most popular system in the world while winner-take-all systems are only found a handful of countries. Proportional voting produces stable coalition governments that are consistently more representative and responsive than our first past the post system.

If we wish to have governments that are truly democratic and represent the interests of the majority then we need to update our archaic system of voting in a way that allows the majority to have real representation.