---
title: Let Them Leave
date: 2020-10-27T00:01:34.382Z
---
Jagmeet Singh recently proposed [a super-wealth tax](https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/hamilton/jagmeet-singh-ndp-super-wealth-tax-hamilton-1.5277626) that would raise $5.6 billion in the first year, and around $70 billion over the next decade. This money would help offset the current recession providing an alternative path to austerity.

The proposal was [met with enthusiasm](https://www.monbiot.com/2011/11/07/the-self-attribution-fallacy/) by most Canadians, and [similar measures](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PoZDe-WTlLs) have been proven to work in the past. However, some argue against the proposal stating that it punishes success, and will lead to successful entrepreneurs leaving Canada for greener pastures.

**To see whether this** \[To determine if this] is a legitimate concern we have to consider the factors that lead to success. One popular idea is that success is the result of hard work, skill, and determination. This idea is otherwise known as meritocracy. The individuals who do the work become successful, and thus deserve to reap the rewards of their success.

However, [mounting evidence](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/beautiful-minds/the-role-of-luck-in-life-success-is-far-greater-than-we-realized/) suggests that the dominant factor in success is actually luck as opposed to hard work. It turns out that being born into a rich family, having the freedom to pursue your interests, being provided with business connections, etc., create the opportunities necessary for success.

**Viewing success through the lens** \[The concept] of meritocracy \[relies on ]**paints** a false narrative of who becomes successful and why. Meritocracy \[implies] that successful people \[accomplish things that others can't,] **have done something extraordinary that can't be accomplished by a majority of people** as opposed to having simply gotten lucky. In fact, Michael Young originally coined the term to [ridicule the idea of such a society](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Rise_of_the_Meritocracy).

The reality of the situation is that most people work hard all their lives, but only a few people see the opportunities for success. The merits of the individual are eclipsed by factors that are largely out of their control. People born into money have a head start in life by having more doors open for them. An average person has to spend majority of their week working hard just to put food on the table and have a roof over their head. Meanwhile, a rich person is free to pursue their interests and passions without having to worry how they're going to sustain themselves.

Unfortunately, successful people themselves often suffer the effects of [self-attribution fallacy](https://www.monbiot.com/2011/11/07/the-self-attribution-fallacy/) where they see their success as the product of their hard work. In fact, there is an entire cottage industry peddling self help miracles guaranteed to unlock the path to success by following the same steps that the lucky few followed. \[maybe something here about how the one thing these books can't suggest is to be born lucky? that would help drive the point home in this para]

The notion of meritocracy helps perpetuate an unfair system where most people are not able to realize their full potential. Meanwhile, a small number of successful individuals are placed on a pedestal. We must reject this idea and look at success \[holistically] **in a holistic fashion**, considering the individual along with the opportunities they were afforded on their way to becoming successful.

Therefore, the fear that successful individuals will leave Canada due to higher taxes is fundamentally misplaced. Instead of viewing these people leaving as a loss we should see it as an opportunity. **The** \[A] wealth tax will create a way to filter out businesses that do not want to pay their fair share, and cultivate the ones that do. We should never worry that the successful individuals who want to freeload \[might] leave. By leaving they're simply creating opportunities for others to become lucky instead. \[doesn't this conclusion challenge the general argument here? Won't it be the same kind of lucky person taking their place? Is that not just as bad? Might need to clarify here, perhaps by taking the idea in your last para and inserting it here. A socialist system would allow everyone to pursue their interests, a planned economy would replace the idea of meritocracy]

Furthermore, given the \[dominant] role that luck \[plays] **is the dominant factor** in success, it's only logical to distribute the wealth of the country fairly as opposed to allowing it to concentrate \[in]**with** the lucky few.

We'd be much better off with a system that empowers \[the] majority of **the** individuals to pursue their interests instead of having to play a lottery to chase success. This system is socialism.